economist | The discovery of an ancient complex in Thessaloniki ignites old debates
<span class=light>Dec 11, 2019 | 885 words
What lies beneath
Books, arts and culture | Prospero |Dec 10th 2019</span>
<b>The argument over what to do with a late-Roman complex has turned into an argument over which parts of history are treated as important</b>

GREEK TOUR guides can sometimes be touchy. Having studied for years to gain a licence, they protect their monopoly on the sharing of information about their country’s treasures. But Yannis Kiourtsoglou, a guide based in northern Greece, is generous with his knowledge these days. Every weekend he takes hundreds of people on free walks through Thessaloniki, drawing attention to the fine monuments that survive and the equally fine ones that were obliterated by archaeological crimes. He tells his followers, for example, about the temple to Egyptian gods, built in 250BC, rediscovered in 1917 and now buried under drab modern buildings.

His tours are part of a campaign, supported by a broad swathe of the country’s archaeologists and academics, to keep intact a remarkable find. At stake is not one building or artefact but the entire central junction of the city as it existed in late Roman times: a covered, colonnaded space where carriages once rattled past, and copper-smiths, jewellers and silk-merchants did a roaring trade. Exaggerating only a little, some have called it the Byzantine Pompeii.

This underground world began coming to light around 2012 as a new metro station was being dug out. Ever since, policymakers have been arguing over whether to leave this subterranean complex intact and build around it, or whether to dismantle and re-assemble it as close as possible to the original location. The leftist Greek government that lost power in July favoured the first option; its right-of-centre successor says the second is the only way to control ballooning costs and finally get the metro running. (Excavations have already cost €130m—$143.9m—against a budget of €30m.)

Metro-building has been underway since 2006, and the lines and tunnels are virtually complete. The location of the station in question, named after Eleftherios Venizelos, a Greek statesman, was a bad idea to begin with. There is another stop, Agia Sophia, only 500 metres away, which was also found to be brimful of antiquities. But planners say it is too late to give up the Venizelos station as that would put unbearable pressure on the neighbouring one.

“I am really passionate about this cause,” says Mr Kiourtsoglou. “If needed I will stand in front of the bulldozers, as a well-known archaeologist did in 1969 when our city’s Roman market was about to be covered by a horrible modern building.” He is a prominent figure in a new Citizens’ Movement for the Protection of Cultural Heritage, formed to protect the Venizelos site. The movement’s head is Yannis Boutaris, a successful former mayor who helped put the city on the global tourist map before stepping down this year. The new mayor, Konstantinos Zervas, supports the dismantling option.


Before any bulldozers have to be defied, some hard political and legal battles may lie ahead. The government, headed by Kyriakos Mitsotakis, is seeking approval to dismantle the complex from the country’s Central Archaeological Council. If that is forthcoming, the Citizens’ Movement will appeal to the Council of State, the highest constitutional authority. It will cite a law which says the “relocation of a monument” is only allowed if it can be proven that there is no other option.

The Citizens’ Movement believes the ancient junction will suffer irreparable damage in the course of being taken apart, and they are sceptical of the authorities’ promise to reassemble it. A similar promise was made in respect of the antiquities found at Agia Sophia and was not kept, they insist. When the much bigger Athens metro system was being built prior to the Olympics of 2004, many ancient objects were removed and then re-displayed on station walls. But no structure so large, intact and revealing of another era emerged during the Athens dig.

The whole dispute reflects some ambivalent feelings, both in Greece and around the world, about the value of the past and which bits of it matter most. Paolo Odorico, an Italian academic who holds a chair of Byzantine studies in Paris, says Thessaloniki could become a unique showcase of the east-Roman or Byzantine empire as it flourished from around 300AD until the conquest of Constantinople by the Ottomans in 1453. The metro decision, he told a public debate in Athens, is a depressing sign that the authorities are failing to grasp that opportunity at a time when the study of Byzantium is gaining global popularity. Many Byzantine churches have survived but few traces exist of the secular aspects of that civilisation: the Venizelos finds are unique. “I implore you, do not let these monuments be destroyed, because if you destroy the past you will destroy the future,” he declared.

Unfortunately, in the eyes of most of the world, discoveries related to the Golden Age of Athens (roughly 500-400BC) or to Alexander the Great (356-323BC) have greater appeal than the shadowy worlds of late antiquity or Byzantium. But Ted Papakostas, an archaeologist based in Thessaloniki who uses flashy videos and graphics to popularise ancient history, believes the value of the Venizelos finds may be understood more clearly by future generations than it is today. “Our children may ask us why we let these monuments be destroyed because supposedly there was no other solution,” he sighs.

The frustrating thing is that the Thessaloniki artefacts, if properly displayed and exposed to the public, have the potential to deliver a more subtle message to the world. They could show more clearly how, in material terms, the classical age morphed gradually into the Christian era. More than 300,000 items, from coins and jewellery to marble statues, amphoras, lamps and perfume vases have been unearthed. Statues of Aphrodite dating from 300AD show how stubbornly the polytheistic religion persisted, even as Christianity was taking hold.

In Greece as a whole, the past is often presented in discrete, hermetically sealed blocs. Modern Athens was re-designed in the 19th century as a showpiece of the classical era, to the point where awkward vestiges of other civilisations, including Christian churches, were destroyed. In Thessaloniki, by contrast, the Christian and Byzantine heritage is more visible (surviving traces of the city’s once vibrant Jewish and Muslim cultures are much rarer). Whatever finally happens over the Thessaloniki metro dispute, it will be a shame if the authorities forfeit the opportunity to present history as the complex pageant it was.

<span class=light>https://www.economist.com/prospero/2019/12/10/the-discovery-of-an-ancient-complex-in-thessaloniki-ignites-old-debates</span>