1 Some people think that art lessons, such as painting and drawing lessons, should be compulsory in secondary schools. To what extent do you agree or disagree?

2 Some people believe that all young adults should be required to do unpaid work to help their local community. Do you think the advantages of this outweigh the disadvantages? 

3 Some people argue that playing computer games is bad for children in every aspect. Others, however, believe that computer games can have some positive effects on children. Discuss both these views and give your own opinion.

4 Today, there are more television channels than ever before. Some people think this leads to more choices for television viewers. Others, however, believe this causes the quality of television programmes to decline. Discuss both these views and give your own opinion.

5 In multi-cultural societies, people of different cultural backgrounds live and work together. Do you think the advantages of multi-cultural societies outweigh the disadvantages?

6 Today, there are many advertisements aimed at children, such as advertisements for toys and snacks. Some people think that advertisements aimed at children should be banned. To what extent do you agree or disagree?

7 In many countries, people eat more food from other regions than local food. Do you think the advantages of this outweigh the disadvantages?

8 Some people think that governments should do more to help citizens to develop healthy diets. Others, however, believe that individuals should be responsible for their own diets. Discuss both these views and give your own opinion.

9 Some people argue that governments of developing countries should introduce new technology to people to improve their quality of life, while others believe that they should provide free education. Discuss both these views and give your own opinion.

10 Some people believe that all mothers and fathers should be required to take a course that prepares them to be good parents. Do you agree or disagree?

11 In some countries, online shopping is replacing shopping in stores. Do you think this is a positive or negative development?

12 The increasing use of mobile phones and computers makes people lose the ability to communicate face to face. To what extent do you agree or disagree?

13 Some people believe that it is a good idea for elderly people to continue to work. Do you agree or disagree?

14 Some people think that young people who have committed serious crimes, such as robberies or violent attacks, should be punished in the same way as adult offenders. To what extent do you agree or disagree?

15 Governments should spend money on the repairs and maintenance of old buildings. To what extent do you agree or disagree?

16 A rise in the standard of living in a country often only benefits cities, not rural areas. What problems can this cause? Suggest some solutions to these problems.

17 In the past, people spent their whole lives in the same place. However, nowadays more and more people move several times in their lives. What are the causes of this trend? Is this a positive or negative development?

18 Some people believe that health care should be free for everyone, while others think that people should pay for their health care. Discuss both these views and give your own opinion.

19 Some people think that governments should spend money on the search for life on other planets, while others believe that is a waste of public money because there are still many problems on Earth. Discuss both these views and give your own opinion.

20 Natural resources, such as oil, forests and fresh water, are being consumed at an alarming rate. What problems does this cause? How can we solve these problems?


You can find some helpful ideas for answering these questions in Day 8 in the Exercise Book.