npr | The Marriage Business
<span class=light>Dec 15, 2020 | 1369 words
December 7, 20205:12 PM ET</span>

The research is in: Americans love weddings.

From dresses to flowers to catering, people spare few expenses when it comes to planning for their big day. In 2019, the average wedding cost about $33,000 and it's estimated that wedding services are a $55 billion industry.

Like all businesses that rely on large gatherings, weddings have been especially hit hard by the coronavirus. But as we've all been told before, there's nothing more powerful than love.

Jon-Paul Brown is the co-owner of Elope Asheville, an elopement business that helps eager couples begin their happily ever after — and while the pandemic initially hit his business hard, he's found a way to adapt.

Stacey talks with Jon-Paul about elopement and the future of the wedding industry.

....to other NPR stories/ additional sources/ further reading and listening:

Music by Drop Electric. Find us: Twitter / Facebook / Newsletter.

<iframe frameborder="no" border="0" marginwidth="0" marginheight="0" width=330 height=86 src="//music.163.com/outchain/player?type=3&id=2071086895&auto=1&height=66"></iframe>
<hr>
UNIDENTIFIED PERSON, BYLINE: NPR.

(SOUNDBITE OF DROP ELECTRIC'S "WAKING UP TO THE FIRE")

STACEY VANEK SMITH, HOST:

This is THE INDICATOR FROM PLANET MONEY. I'm Stacey Vanek Smith. 2020 has been a really hard and a really strange year in a lot of ways in the economy, but also in our personal lives. A lot of people haven't seen their parents or their family in nearly a year. And a lot of friends who live in the same city have essentially been in a long-distance relationship. A lot of weddings, of course, got postponed or even canceled. Weddings are, of course, a massive multibillion-dollar business in the U.S., and they support a lot of small businesses from dressmakers to florists to jewelers to caterers to wedding planners.

JON-PAUL BROWN: I estimate I've officiated 3,500 weddings.

VANEK SMITH: Wow.

BROWN: (Laughter).

VANEK SMITH: This is Jon-Paul Brown. He owns Elope Asheville, a business based in Asheville, N.C.

BROWN: It's pretty much exactly what it sounds like. We plan elopements, which sounds counterintuitive.

VANEK SMITH: Yeah. I was going to say, like, isn't the whole thing, like, elopements, it's like a spur-of-the-moment thing?

BROWN: That's the reputation it had for a while. We're kind of a fly-by-night wedding. But we kind of see elopements more of an alternative to the big, large traditional wedding.

VANEK SMITH: Elope Asheville helps couples plan elopements. Jon-Paul can take care of everything - booking the venue, getting the photographer, getting the flowers and the cake, even planning a few activities.

(SOUNDBITE OF MUSIC)

VANEK SMITH: At least that was his business. Like many small business owners, Jon-Paul saw everything changed back in March. Here at THE INDICATOR, we have been talking to small businesses in all kinds of industries to see how they've been affected by COVID. Right after the break - the wedding business.

(SOUNDBITE OF MUSIC)

VANEK SMITH: Jon-Paul Brown, owner of Elope Asheville, thank you for joining us.

BROWN: Yeah.

VANEK SMITH: So, I mean, I sort of assumed elopements were pretty cut and dry, like no bells and whistles, but I don't know. I mean, do people come to you wanting sort of special themes like an Elvis wedding or a vampire wedding or something like that? Like, what kind of business do you get?

BROWN: So every year on May the 4, we have a run on "Star Wars" weddings.

VANEK SMITH: (Laughter) May the 4 be with you. Wow.

BROWN: That's great. On March 14, there's always Pi Day weddings. It's always the engineers who get married on that day.

VANEK SMITH: I did hear from my colleagues that there was like - that sometimes you get special requests for like a "Princess Bride" wedding.

BROWN: Yes. I have the Pope hat.

VANEK SMITH: Really? Can you deliver it like right now?

BROWN: Oh, God. Mawage (ph) - mawage, that blessed union. The dweam (ph) within a dweam. And wuv (ph), true wuv.

Yeah. That's pretty good (laughter).

VANEK SMITH: So how many - have you done more than one of those?

BROWN: Oh, yeah. Yeah. I've probably done - I bet 20 in my career.

VANEK SMITH: OK. So I have to ask, like, how did you come up with the idea for this business? I mean, are you like a super romantic at heart or are you - yeah.

BROWN: Well, that's that's a funny story because I'd never actually been to a wedding before my first wedding in the business.

VANEK SMITH: You didn't, like, love weddings or anything?

BROWN: No, no, no. I had no idea what I was doing, but I watched a lot of YouTube clips of weddings. And so I just really faked my way through it. I was actually planning my wedding at the time. And I really wanted to go to a park and light up the grill and eat burgers and have somebody come and marry us there in the park while the kids play and all the stuff. And nobody was offering that.

VANEK SMITH: Oh. You were like, hey, I just want, like, sort of a low-key, intimate wedding. And it's either sort of like tens of thousands of dollars or city hall.

BROWN: Exactly. That's the exact thought that I had. And I was like, surely I can't be the only one.

VANEK SMITH: So you were - like in your very first wedding - elopement that you organized, you married the couple.

BROWN: Yes.

VANEK SMITH: And like - you'd never been to a wedding before. What was that...

BROWN: I didn't sleep a wink that whole week leading up to it. I was so nervous. And I swore up and down, this is it. I'm not doing another one. This sucks. I hate it. And I did it. And we were waving goodbye, like at the end of "Princess Bride," where they're, you know, he's waving - have fun storming the castle. That's kind of how we were. And then I had that rush like, oh my God, this is great. You know, I want to do it again.

VANEK SMITH: Whoa.

BROWN: Yeah. So that was kind of cool. But yeah, I did my first one. I thought for sure when I started this I would be making like vacation money or beer money or something like that.

VANEK SMITH: Like a side hustle.

BROWN: Yeah, like a side hustle. I had no - I didn't even want to dare to think that it would become a major thing like it's turned out to be.

VANEK SMITH: So how much does an elopement cost?

BROWN: Yeah. So we have our very - the lowest tier. And pictures included, the whole thing, and it's $400 for that. And...

VANEK SMITH: Wow. That's cheap.

BROWN: Yeah. And then from there, it goes up. It really kind of varies on our location. Where do you want to go? What venue? How long of a drive? How long of a hike? With all the bells and whistles at the most expensive venue we have, you're probably going to spend anywhere from 900 to 1,100 max.

VANEK SMITH: I think the average American wedding is like 30-something-thousand dollars or something.

BROWN: Oh, no, no, no. The national average is around 36,000.

VANEK SMITH: Before the pandemic started, like, what kind of business were you doing? How many people were you marrying?

BROWN: Yeah. On average, before the pandemic, we were doing between 350 and 400 weddings a year.

VANEK SMITH: That's a lot of weddings. You were doing most of them, you said.

BROWN: Yes, I was doing the vast majority of them, and I liked it.

VANEK SMITH: Wow. It sounds like your business is sort of growing. You've got a good business. It's like you've found this niche. And then the pandemic happens back in March. What happened to your business?

BROWN: We were getting emails, multiple emails all day, every day, phone calls canceling. And we were...

VANEK SMITH: Oh.

BROWN: Yeah. We were trying to say, you know, let's not cancel. Let's delay. We were panicking because it's like our whole business was falling completely apart with no money coming in. It was mind-blowing. It was depressing. It was panic-inducing.

VANEK SMITH: You're losing like tens of thousands of dollars a month.

BROWN: Exactly. Exactly.

VANEK SMITH: So what happened to the business?

BROWN: So around mid-April, we started getting the first emails, hey, we had a wedding planned for May. And they just called and canceled. And we still want to get married. Can we come to you guys? And so that was the theme for the rest of the entire year. Every single large wedding in the U.S., pretty much on the vast majority, got canceled this year. And a lot of people really wanted to get married this year. So instead of doing the large wedding, they decided to elope and kind of do the social distanced wedding. The Zoom weddings became a thing this year of having...

VANEK SMITH: Do you do Zoom weddings?

BROWN: Oh, yeah. Yeah. We've done a lot where they just set up a phone on a tripod, boop-boop-boop (ph), do the Zoom thing. And suddenly, 50 people are there watching from the privacy of their own homes.

VANEK SMITH: Wow. Over the summer, like, how many people did you marry?

BROWN: At least 45, if not higher, weddings per month. A normal October is 60. Last year, we had a record 61. And we did a cheer for breaking the record. This year, this October alone, we did 97 weddings.

VANEK SMITH: Whoa.

BROWN: In one month. With October 10 being the busiest, we had 11 weddings in one day.

VANEK SMITH: So you see - like, this has actually been great for your business, this pandemic.

BROWN: Yeah. It's - that's the weird thing about it. It's like, this - the pandemic has been a boon for my business, but I can't be happy about that because...

VANEK SMITH: Oh, yeah.

BROWN: ...You know, so many - I have close friends who are here in town who are business owners, who are bar owners, who have stores. And they're closing down left and right. How can I sit there and be publicly excited about having such a big month when three people that I know of lost their businesses in October? So it's an embarrassment of riches. It's like I - I'm so happy that this is doing well, but it hurts so bad.

VANEK SMITH: Jon-Paul Brown, owner of Elope Asheville, thank you so much for joining us.

BROWN: My pleasure. Any time.

VANEK SMITH: This episode of THE INDICATOR was produced by Nick Fountain and fact-checked by Sean Saldana. THE INDICATOR is edited by Paddy Hirsch and is a production of NPR.

<span class=light>
https://www.npr.org/transcripts/943960152
https://www.npr.org/2020/12/07/943960152/the-marriage-business</span>
