BBC | Coronavirus pandemic and automation are creating what it calls a double disruption scenario for workers
<span class=light>Nov 02, 2020 | 345 words
</span>

Hello, I'm Neil Nunes with the BBC News.

Nigerian soldiers have opened fire on anti-government protesters in the city of Lagos. A witness told the BBC he counted 20 bodies and saw dozens of injured people there for the shooting in the suburb of Lagos. At exactly 6:45 pm, the soldiers, they put up around on the Oriental Hotel and started firing directly at we, the peaceful protesters. They were firing and they were advancing straight at all. It was chaos. Somebody got it straight beside me and he died on the spot. Angry crowds started vandalising shops and burning tires. The Lagos state government said it would investigate the shooting. It comes after a second day of intensified protests against police brutality.

A new report says the coronavirus pandemic and automation are creating what it calls a double disruption scenario for workers. More from Andrew Walker. The World Economic Forums report has some striking findings both on how we will work in the future and how technology will affect the numbers and types of jobs available. It also found evidence that these changes are likely to be more rapid because of the pandemic. Globally, it predicts that machines will displace 85 million jobs by 2025. But more new roles, 97 million are likely to emerge. But in the present report says millions of workers have already experienced profound changes which have hit disadvantaged people with greater ferocity. In two months, the pandemic destroyed more jobs than the financial crisis did in two years.


The United Nations says it's raised more than $1.7 billion in pledges to fund urgent humanitarian aid efforts in the central Sahel region of Africa. The UN Secretary General Antonio Guterres warned that the region was being pushed to breaking point. Security situation has deteriorated sharply, harshly, affecting people's daily lives. Violence is rising, and women and girls are especially vulnerable. The number of families facing hunger has tripled, climate changes threatening people's livelihoods, and COVID-19 is making all of it worse. 22 countries have increased their aid to the Sahel Belt.

The airline Cathay Pacific says it'll cut nearly 6,000 jobs as it deals with the impact of the coronavirus pandemic. The Hong Kong-based company says a further 2,600 positions that are currently unfilled will also be lost, and its regional subsidiary, Cathay Dragon, will cease to operate. Cathay is the latest major carrier in the Asia pacific region to announce drastic cuts to staff numbers in recent weeks.

That's the latest BBC world news.
<span class=light>
http://www.kekenet.com/broadcast/202010/619499.shtml 
</span>
